#Remediation Exercise

I chose music for this exercise, thinking specifically of how turning a song into a video is an act of remediation in its own right, taking something purely auditory and adding a visual component. With the advent of Youtube and Vevo, artists can release multiples videos for the same song, each a different visual remediation of the music. In addition to the video, people have the ability to read the song lyrics without any auditory component through liner notes (for those who still buy physical media) or song lyric and interpretation sites like azlyrics.com or songmeanings.com. In some cases, as with RapGenius (genius.com), you can see song lyrics displayed side by side with annotations by fans and site users. 

My first thought was of the song "Go Outside" by Cults and the resulting two videos released to YouTube. The original, somewhat controversial video features footage of the band performing the song with archival footage of infamous cult leader Jim Jones and newsreel of the Jonestown massacre coverage https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eAM9diyVRiM. The song also received a more conventional video starring young actors (including Emma Roberts, niece of Julia) https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vWnGQPOQLhw in something that is clearly paying homage to French new wave cinema. I couldn't find examples of this for this particular song, but music is also remediated by the non-famous recording their own versions of songs and posting to YouTube with either simple graphics or a full video shoot. Examples of this include (and I'm sorry, so sorry for choosing such arguably awful songs)
just about anything Lady Gaga has ever recorded. A search on Lady Gaga cover gives over 90 million results on Youtube. More recently, a lip-synched version of a Taylor Swift song done by fraternity brothers https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=a3TXVLvKHv4

Why these remediations? For one thing, adding the different medium brings out aspects to the original work that might not otherwise be apparent, such as the darker tones in the otherwise pop-friendly song by Cults that you can see by reading the lyrics without performance or by seeing the music associated with video of human tragedy with the New Wave style video remediation, it places the song in context of other artists and artistic and historical movements. In the case of "regular" people performing, variations in performance style or type of performer also cause you to look at the music in a different sociopolitical context since soldiers covering "Telephone" or frat boys mimicing teenage girl behavior while singing Taylor Swift connect these pieces to a host of events and public discourse on war, sexual assault, and gender stereotypes. In this way, the remediations seem to fill in gaps by giving people a chance to create as well as to passively consume and for the music to become more resonant with people's current cultural experiences and reference points. 
